

Want to start a startup?  Get funded by
Y Combinator.




May 2002



"We were after the C++ programmers. We managed to drag a 
lot of them about halfway to Lisp."- Guy Steele, co-author of the Java spec




In the software business there is an ongoing
struggle between the pointy-headed academics, and another
equally formidable force, the pointy-haired bosses.  Everyone
knows who the pointy-haired boss is, right?  I think most
people in the technology world not only recognize this
cartoon character, but know the actual person in their company
that he is modelled upon.The pointy-haired boss miraculously combines two qualities
that are common by themselves, but rarely seen together:
(a) he knows nothing whatsoever about technology, and
(b) he has very strong opinions about it.Suppose, for example, you need to write a piece of software.
The pointy-haired boss has no idea how this software
has to work, and can't tell one programming language from
another, and yet he knows what language you should write it in.
Exactly.  He thinks you should write it in Java.Why does he think this?  Let's
take a look inside the brain of the pointy-haired boss.  What
he's thinking is something like this.  Java is a standard.
I know it must be, because I read about it in the press all the time.
Since it is a standard, I won't get in trouble for using it.
And that also means there will always be lots of Java programmers,
so if the programmers working for me now quit, as programmers
working for me mysteriously always do, I can easily replace
them.Well, this doesn't sound that unreasonable.  But it's all
based on one unspoken assumption, and that assumption
turns out to be false.  The pointy-haired boss believes that all
programming languages are pretty much equivalent.
If that were true, he would be right on
target.  If languages are all equivalent, sure, use whatever 
language everyone else is using.But all languages are not equivalent, and I think I can prove
this to you without even getting into the differences between them.
If you asked the pointy-haired boss in 1992 what language     
software should be written in, he would have answered with as
little hesitation as he does today.  Software should be  
written in C++.  But if languages are all equivalent, why should the
pointy-haired boss's opinion ever change?  In fact, why should
the developers of Java have even bothered to create a new
language?Presumably, if you create a new language, it's because you think
it's better in some way than what people already had.  And in fact, Gosling
makes it clear in the first Java white paper that Java
was designed to fix some problems with C++.
So there you have it: languages are not all equivalent.
If you follow the
trail through the pointy-haired boss's brain to Java and then
back through Java's history to its origins, you end up holding
an idea that contradicts the assumption you started with.So, who's right?  James Gosling, or the pointy-haired boss?
Not surprisingly, Gosling is right.  Some languages are better,
for certain problems, than others.  And you know, that raises some
interesting questions.  Java was designed to be better, for certain
problems, than C++.  What problems?  When is Java better and 
when is C++?  Are there situations where other languages are
better than either of them?Once you start considering this question, you have opened a
real can of worms.  If the pointy-haired boss had to think
about the problem in its full complexity, it would make his
brain explode.  As long as he considers all languages   
equivalent, all he has to do is choose the one
that seems to have the most momentum, and since that is more
a question of fashion than technology, even he
can probably get the right answer.
But if languages vary, he suddenly
has to solve two simultaneous equations, trying to find
an optimal balance between two things he knows nothing   
about: the relative suitability of the twenty or so leading
languages for the problem he needs to solve, and the odds of
finding programmers, libraries, etc. for each.
If that's what's on the other side of the door, it
is no surprise that the pointy-haired boss doesn't want to open it.The disadvantage of believing that all programming languages
are equivalent is that it's not true.  But the advantage is 
that it makes your life a lot simpler.
And I think that's the main reason the idea is so widespread.
It is a comfortable idea.We know that Java must be pretty good, because it is the
cool, new programming language.  Or is it?  If you look at the world of
programming languages from a distance, it looks like Java is
the latest thing.  (From far enough away, all you can see is
the large, flashing billboard paid for by Sun.)
But if you look at this world
up close, you find that there are degrees of coolness.  Within
the hacker subculture, there is another language called Perl
that is considered a lot cooler than Java.  Slashdot, for
example, is generated by Perl.  I don't think you would find
those guys using Java Server Pages.  But there is another,
newer language, called Python, whose users tend to look down on Perl,
and more waiting in the wings.If you look at these languages in order, Java, Perl, Python,
you notice an interesting pattern.  At least, you notice this
pattern if you are a Lisp hacker.  Each one is progressively 
more like Lisp.  Python copies even features
that many Lisp hackers consider to be mistakes.
You could translate simple Lisp programs into Python line for line.
It's 2002, and programming languages have almost caught up 
with 1958.Catching Up with MathWhat I mean is that
Lisp was first discovered by John McCarthy in 1958,
and popular programming languages are only now
catching up with the ideas he developed then.Now, how could that be true?  Isn't computer technology something
that changes very rapidly?  I mean, in 1958, computers were
refrigerator-sized behemoths with the processing power of    
a wristwatch.  How could any technology that old even be
relevant, let alone superior to the latest developments?I'll tell you how.  It's because Lisp was not really
designed to be a programming language, at least not in the sense
we mean today.  What we mean by a programming language is
something we use to tell a computer what to do.   McCarthy
did eventually intend to develop a programming language in
this sense, but the Lisp that we actually ended up with was based
on something separate that he did as a 
theoretical exercise-- an effort
to define a more convenient alternative to the Turing Machine.
As McCarthy said later,

Another way to show that Lisp was neater than Turing machines
was to write a universal Lisp function
and show that it is briefer and more comprehensible than the
description of a universal Turing machine.
This was the Lisp function eval..., 
which computes the value of
a Lisp expression....
Writing eval required inventing a notation representing Lisp
functions as Lisp data, and such a notation
was devised for the purposes of the paper with no thought that
it would be used to express Lisp programs in practice.

What happened next was that, some time in late 1958, Steve Russell,
one of McCarthy's
grad students, looked at this definition of eval and realized  
that if he translated it into machine language, the result
would be a Lisp interpreter.This was a big surprise at the time.
Here is what McCarthy said about it later in an interview:

Steve Russell said, look, why don't I program this eval..., and
I said to him, ho, ho, you're confusing theory with practice,
this eval is intended for reading, not for
computing. But he went ahead and did it. That is, he compiled the eval
in my paper into [IBM] 704 machine
code, fixing bugs, and then advertised this as a Lisp interpreter,
which it certainly was. So at that point Lisp
had essentially the form that it has today....

Suddenly, in a matter of weeks I think, McCarthy found his theoretical
exercise transformed into an actual programming language-- and a
more powerful one than he had intended.So the short explanation of why this 1950s language is not
obsolete is that it was not technology but math, and
math doesn't get stale.   The right thing to compare Lisp
to is not 1950s hardware, but, say, the Quicksort
algorithm, which was discovered in 1960 and is still
the fastest general-purpose sort.There is one other language still
surviving from the 1950s, Fortran, and it represents the
opposite approach to language design.  Lisp was a
piece of theory that unexpectedly got turned into a
programming language.  Fortran was developed intentionally as
a programming language, but what we would now consider a
very low-level one.Fortran I, the language that was
developed in 1956, was a very different animal from present-day
Fortran.   Fortran I was pretty much assembly
language with math.  In some ways it was less
powerful than more recent assembly languages; there were no   
subroutines, for example, only branches.
Present-day Fortran is now arguably closer to Lisp than to
Fortran I.Lisp and Fortran were the trunks of two separate evolutionary trees, 
one rooted in math and one rooted in machine architecture.
These two trees have been converging ever since.
Lisp started out powerful, and over the next twenty years
got fast.  So-called mainstream languages started out
fast, and over the next forty years gradually got more powerful,
until now the most advanced
of them are fairly close to Lisp.
Close, but they are still missing a few things....What Made Lisp DifferentWhen it was first developed, Lisp embodied nine new
ideas.  Some of these we now take for granted, others are
only seen in more advanced languages, and two are still
unique to Lisp.  The nine ideas are, in order of their
adoption by the mainstream,

 Conditionals.  A conditional is an if-then-else
construct.  We take these for granted now, but Fortran I
didn't have them. It had only a conditional goto
closely based on the underlying machine instruction. A function type. In Lisp, functions are
a data type just like integers or strings.
They have a literal representation, can be stored in variables,
can be passed as arguments, and so on. Recursion.  Lisp was the first programming language to
support it. Dynamic typing.  In Lisp, all variables
are effectively pointers. Values are what
have types, not variables, and assigning or binding
variables means copying pointers, not what they point to. Garbage-collection. Programs composed of expressions.  Lisp programs are
trees of expressions, each of which returns a value.
This is in contrast to Fortran
and most succeeding languages, which distinguish between
expressions and statements.It was natural to have this
distinction in Fortran I because
you could not nest statements.  And
so while you needed expressions for math to work, there was
no point in making anything else return a value, because
there could not be anything waiting for it.This limitation
went away with the arrival of block-structured languages,
but by then it was too late. The distinction between
expressions and statements was entrenched.  It spread from
Fortran into Algol and then to both their descendants. A symbol type.  Symbols are effectively pointers to strings
stored in a hash table.  So
you can test equality by comparing a pointer,
instead of comparing each character. A notation for code using trees of symbols and constants. The whole language there all the time.  There is
no real distinction between read-time, compile-time, and runtime.
You can compile or run code while reading, read or run code
while compiling, and read or compile code at runtime.Running code at read-time lets users reprogram Lisp's syntax;
running code at compile-time is the basis of macros; compiling
at runtime is the basis of Lisp's use as an extension
language in programs like Emacs; and reading at runtime
enables programs to communicate using s-expressions, an
idea recently reinvented as XML.

When Lisp first appeared, these ideas were far
removed from ordinary programming practice, which was
dictated largely by the hardware available in the late 1950s.
Over time, the default language, embodied
in a succession of popular languages, has
gradually evolved toward Lisp.  Ideas 1-5 are now widespread.
Number 6 is starting to appear in the mainstream.  
Python has a form of 7, though there doesn't seem to be    
any syntax for it.As for number 8, this may be the most interesting of the
lot.  Ideas 8 and 9 only became part of Lisp
by accident, because Steve Russell implemented
something McCarthy had never intended to be implemented.
And yet these ideas turn out to be responsible for
both Lisp's strange appearance and its most distinctive
features.  Lisp looks strange not so much because
it has a strange syntax as because it has no syntax;
you express programs directly in the parse trees that
get built behind the scenes when other languages are
parsed, and these trees are made
of lists, which are Lisp data structures.Expressing the language in its own data structures turns
out to be a very powerful feature. Ideas 8 and 9
together mean that you
can write programs that write programs.  That may sound
like a bizarre idea, but it's an everyday thing in Lisp. 
The most common way to do it is with something called a        
macro.The term "macro" does not mean in Lisp what it means in other
languages.
A Lisp macro can be anything from an abbreviation
to a compiler for a new language.
If you want to really understand Lisp,
or just expand your programming horizons, I would 
learn more about macros.Macros (in the Lisp sense) are still, as far as
I know, unique to Lisp.
This is partly because in order to have macros you
probably have to make your language look as strange as
Lisp.  It may also be because if you do add that final
increment of power, you can no
longer claim to have invented a new language, but only
a new dialect of Lisp.I mention this mostly
as a joke, but it is quite true. If you define
a language that has car, cdr, cons, quote, cond, atom,
eq, and
a notation for functions expressed as lists, then you
can build all the rest of Lisp out of it.  That is in
fact the defining quality of Lisp: it was in order to
make this so that McCarthy gave Lisp the shape it has.Where Languages MatterSo suppose Lisp does represent a kind of limit     
that mainstream languages are approaching asymptotically-- does
that mean you should actually use it to write software?
How much do you lose by using a less powerful language?
Isn't it wiser, sometimes, not to be
at the very edge of innovation?
And isn't popularity to some extent
its own justification?  Isn't the pointy-haired boss right,
for example, to want to use a language for which he can easily
hire programmers?There are, of course, projects where the choice of programming
language doesn't matter much.  As a
rule, the more demanding the application, the more
leverage you get from using a powerful language.  But
plenty of projects are not demanding at all.
Most programming probably consists of writing 
little glue programs, and for 
little glue programs you
can use any language that you're already
familiar with and that has good libraries for whatever you
need to do.  If you just need to feed data from one   
Windows app to another, sure, use Visual Basic.You can write little glue programs in Lisp too
(I use it as a desktop calculator), but the biggest win
for languages like Lisp is at the other end of
the spectrum, where you need to write sophisticated
programs to solve hard problems in the face of fierce competition.
A good example is the
airline fare search program that ITA Software licenses to
Orbitz.  These
guys entered a market already dominated by two big,
entrenched competitors, Travelocity and Expedia, and  
seem to have just humiliated them technologically.The core of ITA's application is a 200,000 line Common Lisp program
that searches many orders of magnitude more possibilities
than their competitors, who apparently
are still using mainframe-era programming techniques.
(Though ITA is also in a sense
using a mainframe-era programming language.)
I have never seen any of ITA's code, but according to
one of their top hackers they use a lot of macros,
and I am not surprised to hear it.Centripetal ForcesI'm not saying there is no cost to using uncommon  
technologies.  The pointy-haired boss is not completely
mistaken to worry about this.  But because he doesn't understand
the risks, he tends to magnify them.I can think of three problems that could arise from using
less common languages.  Your programs might not work well with
programs written in other languages.  You might have fewer
libraries at your disposal.  And you might have trouble
hiring programmers.How much of a problem is each of these?  The importance of
the first varies depending on whether you have control
over the whole system.  If you're writing software that has
to run on a remote user's machine on top of a buggy,
closed operating system (I mention no names), there may be
advantages to writing your application in the
same language as the OS.
But if you control the whole system and
have the source code of all the parts, as ITA presumably does, you
can use whatever languages you want.  If
any incompatibility arises, you can fix it yourself.In server-based applications you can
get away with using the most advanced technologies,
and I think this is the main
cause of what Jonathan Erickson calls the "programming language
renaissance."  This is why we even hear about new
languages like Perl and Python.  We're not hearing about these
languages because people are using them to write Windows
apps, but because people are using them on servers.  And as
software shifts 
off the desktop and onto servers (a future even
Microsoft seems resigned to), there will be less
and less pressure to use middle-of-the-road technologies.As for libraries, their importance also
depends on the application.  For less demanding problems,
the availability of libraries can outweigh the intrinsic power
of the language.  Where is the breakeven point?  Hard to say
exactly, but wherever it is, it is short of anything you'd
be likely to call an application.  If a company considers
itself to be in the software business, and they're writing
an application that will be one of their products,
then it will probably involve several hackers and take at
least six months to write.  In a project of that
size, powerful languages probably start to outweigh
the convenience of pre-existing libraries.The third worry of the pointy-haired boss, the difficulty
of hiring programmers, I think is a red herring.   How many
hackers do you need to hire, after all?  Surely by now we
all know that software is best developed by teams of less
than ten people.   And you shouldn't have trouble hiring
hackers on that scale for any language anyone has ever heard
of.  If you can't find ten Lisp hackers, then your company is
probably based in the wrong city for developing software.In fact, choosing a more powerful language probably decreases the
size of the team you need, because (a) if you use a more powerful
language you probably won't need as many hackers,
and (b) hackers who work in more advanced languages are likely
to be smarter.I'm not saying that you won't get a lot of pressure to use
what are perceived as "standard" technologies.  At Viaweb
(now Yahoo Store),
we raised some eyebrows among VCs and potential acquirers by
using Lisp.  But we also raised eyebrows by using
generic Intel boxes as servers instead of
"industrial strength" servers like Suns, for using a
then-obscure open-source Unix variant called FreeBSD instead
of a real commercial OS like Windows NT, for ignoring
a supposed e-commerce standard called 
SET that no one now
even remembers, and so on.You can't let the suits make technical decisions for you.
Did it
alarm some potential acquirers that we used Lisp?  Some, slightly,
but if we hadn't used Lisp, we wouldn't have been
able to write the software that made them want to buy us.
What seemed like an anomaly to them was in fact
cause and effect.If you start a startup, don't design your product to please
VCs or potential acquirers.  Design your product to please
the users.  If you win the users, everything else will
follow.  And if you don't, no one will care
how comfortingly orthodox your technology choices were.The Cost of Being AverageHow much do you lose by using a less powerful language?  
There is actually some data out there about that.The most convenient measure of power is probably 
code size.
The point of high-level
languages is to give you bigger abstractions-- bigger bricks,
as it were, so you don't need as many to build
a wall of a given size.
So the more powerful
the language, the shorter the program (not simply in
characters, of course, but in distinct elements).How does a more powerful language enable you to write
shorter programs?  One technique you can use, if the language will
let you, is something called 
bottom-up programming.  Instead of
simply writing your application in the base language, you
build on top of the base language a language for writing
programs like yours, then write your program
in it. The combined code can be much shorter than if you
had written your whole program in the base language-- indeed,
this is how most compression algorithms work.
A bottom-up program should be easier to modify as well,  
because in many cases the language layer won't have to change
at all.Code size is important, because the time it takes
to write a program depends mostly on its length.
If your program would be three times as long in another
language, it will take three times as long to write-- and
you can't get around this by hiring more people, because
beyond a certain size new hires are actually a net lose.
Fred Brooks described this phenomenon in his famous
book The Mythical Man-Month, and everything I've seen
has tended to confirm what he said.So how much shorter are your programs if you write them in
Lisp?  Most of the numbers I've heard for Lisp
versus C, for example, have been around 7-10x.
But a recent article about ITA in 
New
Architect magazine said that
"one line of Lisp can replace 20 lines of C," and since
this article was full of quotes from ITA's president, I
assume they got this number from ITA.  If so then
we can put some faith in it; ITA's software includes a lot
of C and  C++ as well as Lisp, so they are speaking from
experience.My guess is that these multiples aren't even constant.
I think they increase when
you face harder problems and also when you have smarter
programmers.  A really good hacker can squeeze more
out of better tools.As one data point on the curve, at any rate,
if you were to compete with ITA and
chose to write your software in C, they would be able to develop
software twenty times faster than you.
If you spent a year on a new feature, they'd be able to
duplicate it in less than three weeks.  Whereas if they spent
just three months developing something new, it would be
five years before you had it too.And you know what?  That's the best-case scenario.
When you talk about code-size ratios, you're implicitly assuming
that you can actually write the program in the weaker language.
But in fact there are limits on what programmers can do.
If you're trying to solve a hard problem with a language that's
too low-level, you reach a point where there is just too 
much to keep in your head at once.So when I say it would take ITA's imaginary
competitor five years to duplicate something ITA could
write in Lisp in three months, I mean five years
if nothing goes wrong.  In fact, the way things work in 
most companies, any
development project that would take five years is
likely never to get finished at all.I admit this is an extreme case.  ITA's hackers seem to
be unusually smart, and C is a pretty low-level language.
But in a competitive market, even a differential of two or
three to one would
be enough to guarantee that you'd always be behind.A RecipeThis is the kind of possibility that the pointy-haired boss
doesn't even want to think about.  And so most of them don't.
Because, you know, when it comes down to it, the pointy-haired
boss doesn't mind if his company gets their ass kicked, so
long as no one can prove it's his fault.
The safest plan for him personally
is to stick close to the center of the herd.Within large organizations, the phrase used to
describe this approach is "industry best practice."
Its purpose is to shield the pointy-haired
boss from responsibility: if he chooses
something that is "industry best practice," and the company
loses, he can't be blamed.  He didn't choose, the industry did.I believe this term was originally used to describe
accounting methods and so on.  What it means, roughly,
is don't do anything weird.  And in accounting that's
probably a good idea.  The terms "cutting-edge" and  
"accounting" do not sound good together.  But when you import
this criterion into decisions about technology, you start
to get the wrong answers.Technology often should be
cutting-edge.  In programming languages, as Erann Gat
has pointed out, what "industry best practice"  actually
gets you is not the best, but merely the
average.  When a decision causes you to develop software at
a fraction of the rate of more aggressive competitors,  
"best practice" is a misnomer.
So here we have two pieces of information that I think are
very valuable.  In fact, I know it from my own experience.
Number 1, languages vary in power.  Number 2, most managers
deliberately ignore this.  Between them, these two facts
are literally a recipe for making money.  ITA is an example
of this recipe in action.
If you want to win in a software
business, just take on the hardest problem you can find,
use the most powerful language you can get, and wait for
your competitors' pointy-haired bosses to revert to the mean.

Appendix: PowerAs an illustration of what I mean about the relative power
of programming languages, consider the following problem.
We want to write a function that generates accumulators-- a
function that takes a number n, and
returns a function that takes another number i and
returns n incremented by i.(That's incremented by, not plus.  An accumulator
has to accumulate.)In Common Lisp this would be

(defun foo (n)
  (lambda (i) (incf n i)))

and in Perl 5,

sub foo {  
  my ($n) = @_;
  sub {$n += shift}
}

which has more elements than the Lisp version because
you have to extract parameters manually in Perl.In Smalltalk the code is slightly longer than in Lisp

foo: n                              
  |s|                      
  s := n.                          
  ^[:i| s := s+i. ] 

because although in general lexical variables work, you can't
do an assignment to a parameter, so you have to create a
new variable s.In Javascript the example is, again, slightly longer, because 
Javascript retains
the distinction between statements and
expressions, so you need explicit return statements
to return values:

function foo(n) { 
  return function (i) { 
           return n += i } }

(To be fair, Perl also retains
this distinction, but deals with it in typical Perl fashion
by letting you omit returns.)If you try to translate the Lisp/Perl/Smalltalk/Javascript code into 
Python you run into some limitations.  Because Python
doesn't fully support lexical variables,
you have to create a data structure to hold the value of n.
And although
Python does have a function data type, there is no
literal representation for one (unless the body is
only a single expression) so you need to create a named
function to return.  This is what you end up with:

def foo(n):
  s = [n]
  def bar(i):
    s[0] += i
    return s[0] 
  return bar

Python users might legitimately ask why they can't
just write

def foo(n):
  return lambda i: return n += i

or even

def foo(n):
  lambda i: n += i

and my guess is that they probably will, one day.
(But if they don't want to wait for Python to evolve the rest
of the way into Lisp, they could always just...)
In OO languages, you can, to a limited extent, simulate
a closure (a function that refers to variables defined in
enclosing scopes) by defining a class with one method
and a field to replace each variable from an enclosing
scope.  This makes the programmer do the kind of code
analysis that would be done by the compiler in a language
with full support for lexical scope, and it won't work
if more than one function refers to the same variable,
but it is enough in simple cases like this.Python experts seem to agree that this is the
preferred way to solve the problem in Python, writing
either

def foo(n):
  class acc:
    def __init__(self, s):
        self.s = s
    def inc(self, i):
        self.s += i
        return self.s
  return acc(n).inc

or

class foo:
  def __init__(self, n):
      self.n = n
  def __call__(self, i):
      self.n += i
      return self.n

I include these because I wouldn't want Python
advocates to say I was misrepresenting the language,   
but both seem to me more complex than the first   
version.  You're doing the same thing, setting up
a separate place to hold the accumulator; it's just
a field in an object instead of the head of a list.
And the use of these special,
reserved field names, especially __call__, seems
a bit of a hack.In the rivalry between Perl and Python, the claim of the
Python hackers seems to be that
that Python is a more elegant alternative to Perl, but what
this case shows is that power is the ultimate elegance:
the Perl program is simpler (has fewer elements), even if the
syntax is a bit uglier.How about other languages? In the other languages
mentioned in this talk-- Fortran, C, C++, Java, and
Visual Basic-- it is not clear whether you can actually
solve this problem.
Ken Anderson says that the following code is about as close
as you can get in Java:

public interface Inttoint {
  public int call(int i);
}


public static Inttoint foo(final int n) {
  return new Inttoint() {
    int s = n;
    public int call(int i) {
    s = s + i;
    return s;
    }};
}

This falls short of the spec because it only works for
integers.  After many email exchanges with Java hackers,
I would say that writing a properly polymorphic version
that behaves like the preceding examples is somewhere
between damned awkward and impossible.  If anyone wants to
write one I'd be very curious to see it, but I personally
have timed out.It's not literally true that you can't solve this
problem in other languages, of course.  The fact
that all these languages are Turing-equivalent means
that, strictly speaking, you can write any program in
any of them.  So how would you do it?  In the limit case,
by writing a Lisp
interpreter in the less powerful language.That sounds like a joke, but it happens so often to
varying degrees in large programming projects that
there is a name for the phenomenon, Greenspun's Tenth
Rule:

 Any sufficiently
     complicated C or Fortran program contains an ad hoc
     informally-specified bug-ridden slow implementation of half of
     Common Lisp.

If you try to solve a
hard problem, the question is not whether you will use
a powerful enough language, but whether you will (a)
use a powerful language, (b) write a de facto interpreter
for one, or (c) yourself become a human compiler for one.
We see this already
begining to happen in the Python example, where we are
in effect simulating the code that a compiler
would generate to implement a lexical variable.This practice is not only common, but institutionalized.  For example,
in the OO world you hear a good deal about 
"patterns".
I wonder if these patterns are not sometimes evidence of case (c),
the human compiler, at work.  When I see patterns in my programs,
I consider it a sign of trouble.  The shape of a program
should reflect only the problem it needs to solve.
Any other regularity in the code is a sign, to me at
least, that I'm using abstractions that aren't powerful
enough-- often that I'm generating by hand the
expansions of some macro that I need to write.Notes
 The IBM 704 CPU was about the size of a refrigerator,
but a lot heavier.  The CPU weighed 3150 pounds,
and the 4K of RAM was in a separate
box weighing another 4000 pounds.  The
Sub-Zero 690, one of the largest household refrigerators,
weighs 656 pounds. Steve Russell also wrote the first (digital) computer
game, Spacewar, in 1962. If you want to trick a pointy-haired boss into letting you
write software in Lisp, you could try telling him it's XML. Here is the accumulator generator in other Lisp dialects:

Scheme: (define (foo n) 
          (lambda (i) (set! n (+ n i)) n))
Goo:    (df foo (n) (op incf n _)))
Arc:    (def foo (n) [++ n _])

 Erann Gat's sad tale about
"industry best practice" at JPL inspired me to address
this generally misapplied phrase. Peter Norvig found that
16 of the 23 patterns in Design Patterns were 
"invisible
or simpler" in Lisp. Thanks to the many people who answered my questions about
various languages and/or read drafts of this, including
Ken Anderson, Trevor Blackwell, Erann Gat, Dan Giffin, Sarah Harlin,
Jeremy Hylton, Robert Morris, Peter Norvig, Guy Steele, and Anton
van Straaten.
They bear no blame for any opinions expressed.
Related:Many people have responded to this talk,
so I have set up an additional page to deal with the issues they have
raised: Re: Revenge of the Nerds.It also set off an extensive and often useful discussion on the 
LL1
mailing list.  See particularly the mail by Anton van Straaten on semantic
compression.Some of the mail on LL1 led me to try to go deeper into the subject
of language power in Succinctness is Power.A larger set of canonical implementations of the accumulator
generator benchmark are collected together on their own page.Japanese Translation, Spanish
Translation, 
Chinese Translation