
There is a kind of mania for object-oriented programming at the moment, but

some of the smartest programmers I know are some of the least excited about it.My own feeling is that object-oriented
programming is a useful technique in some
cases, but it isn't something that has to pervade every program you
write.  You should be able to define new types,
but you shouldn't have to express every program as the
definition of new types.I think there are five reasons people like object-oriented   
programming, and three and a half of them are bad:
 Object-oriented programming is exciting   
if you have a statically-typed language without 
lexical closures or macros.  To some degree, it offers a way around these
limitations.  (See Greenspun's Tenth Rule.) Object-oriented programming is popular in big companies,
because it suits the way they write software.  At big companies,
software tends to be written by large (and frequently changing)  
teams of
mediocre programmers.  Object-oriented programming imposes a
discipline on these programmers that prevents any one of them
from doing too much damage.  The price is that the resulting
code is bloated with protocols and full of duplication.  
This is not too high a price for big companies, because their
software is probably going to be bloated and full of 
duplication anyway. Object-oriented
programming generates a lot of what looks like work.
Back in the days of fanfold, there was a type of programmer who
would only put five or ten lines of code on a page, preceded
by twenty lines of elaborately formatted comments. 
Object-oriented programming is like crack for these people: it lets
you incorporate all this scaffolding right into your source
code.  Something that a Lisp hacker might handle by pushing
a symbol onto a list becomes a whole file of classes and
methods.  So it is a good tool if you want to convince yourself,
or someone else, that you are doing a lot of work. If a language is itself an object-oriented program, it can
be extended by users.  Well, maybe.  Or maybe you can do
even better by offering the sub-concepts
of object-oriented programming a la carte.  Overloading, 
for example, is not intrinsically tied to classes.  We'll see. Object-oriented abstractions map neatly onto the domains
of  certain specific kinds of programs, like simulations and CAD
systems.                                        


I personally have never needed object-oriented abstractions.
Common Lisp has an enormously powerful object system and I've
never used it once.  I've done a lot of things (e.g. making         
hash tables full of closures) that would have required 
object-oriented techniques to do in wimpier languages, but
I have never had to use CLOS.Maybe I'm just stupid, or have worked on some limited subset
of applications.  There is a danger in designing a language
based on one's own experience of programming.  But it seems
more dangerous to put stuff in that you've never needed 
because it's thought to be a good idea.